# AEP 5: Applying derivative rules to real data

# Overview

In this AEP, you'll construct regression models
for a data set, use the techniques of Chapter 2 to find the first and second derivatives of the data at a point, and then explain what the derivative information tells you about how the relationship is being affected by change.

**Learning Targets associated with this AEP:**

-   **D.2**  **(CORE)**: I can use derivative notation correctly, state the units of a derivative, estimate the value of a derivative using difference quotients, and correctly interpret the meaning of a derivative in context.
-   **D.3**  **(CORE)**: Given information about $f$, $f'$, or $f''$, I can correctly give information about $f$, $f'$, or $f''$ and the increasing/decreasing behavior and concavity of $f$ (and vice versa).
-   **DC.1**  **(CORE)**: I can compute derivatives correctly for power, polynomial, and exponential functions and the sine and cosine functions, and basic combinations of these (constant multiples, sums, differences).

## Technology Background

For ths Miniproject, you will need to know how to **plot data points** in Desmos and how to **fit data with polynomial and exponential regressions** in Desmos. These procedures are explained in AEP 1 and AEP 2. (You do not need to complete those AEPs in order to do this one, however.) 

## AEP Description and Tasks

### What this AEP is about

Data sets that involve two variables that are linked together somehow are unsurprisingly called *two-variable data set*. An example of a two-variable data set would be the Census Bureau population data for a
city, where the population of a city is linked with the year when the population is measured. There is an implied relationship between one variable and the other. For example, in the population data, there is an implied relationship between time and population -- as time passes, population changes. Time is like the input variable to a function, and population is like the output; we call time the **independent variable** and population the **dependent variable** because population depends on time.

AEP 5 is about modeling a two-variable data set in the real world with a function, then using the rules of differentiation that we've learned to analyze and understand the change behavior of the model on a deep level, and interpret the meaning of that behavior to a general audience. 

### Setup (do this first) 

For this Miniproject, you are to go out onto the Internet and find a two-variable data set and analyze it. You can use any kind of data you wish, as long as:

-   It doesn't have to do with population and time, because that's been don already (it's the subject of AEP 1). 
-   The set has at least five pairs of data in it.

-   The data set is real (not made up) and you can provide a link to a reference for it.

-   The data set has some kind of personal relevance to you. Otherwise this assignment won't be as interesting.

Also, please use a different data set than any of the ones you have used on earlier AEP's, if you've done any earlier AEP's.

A good source for two-variable data sets is kaggle.com. This is a website for people learning how to do data science. To access it, go to kaggle.com and register with Google or your email, then sign in. 


Place your data into a spreadsheet, such as Excel or a Google
Spreadsheet with the independent variable in Column A and the dependent
variable in Column B. **Note:** If the numbers in your data are large,
you should consider rescaling your data using some sensible method. For
example, if you are looking at household incomes that range from
\$50,000 to \$500,000, then consider measuring your incomes instead in
"tens of thousands" and let the data range from $5$ to $50$ instead.

Then copy and paste your data from the spreadsheet into a Desmos page.
This will tell Desmos to produce a data table, and the data will be
plotted in Desmos with the zooming level set appropriately.

At this point you're ready to begin the Miniproject tasks.

1.  First, here is a warmup exercise to make sure you are familiar with
    the basic concepts of in this miniproject (differentiating basic
    functions and interpreting the results).

    Suppose that $V(t) = 24 \cdot 1.07^t + 6 \sin(t)$ represents the
    value of a person's investment portfolio (in thousands of dollars)
    in year $t$, where $t=0$ corresponds to January 1, 2010.

    1.  At what instantaneous rate is the portfolio's value changing on
        January 1, 2012? Do your work by hand; show all your work, and
        put correct units of measurement on the answer. (**NOTE:**
        *Remember to put your calculator or computing device in radian
        mode when doing calculations with trigonometric functions.*)

    2.  Calculate the value of $V''(2)$. What are the units on this
        quantity? What does the sign (positive/negative/zero) of this
        quantity tell you about how the portfolio's value is changing?
        Show all your work by hand, and use clear and correct English.

2.  Now go out to the web and find a set of two-variable data.

    1.  Write a paragraph that includes a link to the source of your
        data. Use the paragraph to explain what the data represent, why
        you found the data interesting enough to use for this
        Miniproject, and who might find these data important in a
        real-world job.

    2.  On Desmos, plot the data points (by entering them into a
        spreadsheet and then copy/pasting them as described above). Then
        fit the data with a third-degree polynomial regression, a
        fourth-degree polynomial regression, and an exponential
        regression. When done, give a link to your graphs.

    3.  Give the precise formulas for each of your regression models.
        The values of the parameters are given on the graph. For
        example, look at the sample results here:
        <https://goo.gl/0U8atf>. The quadratic model has three
        parameters: $a$, $b$, and $c$; their values are shown where it
        says "Parameters". This means that the formula for this model is
        $$y_1 = 57.689x_1^2 - 7594.8x_1 + 244380$$ Beneath each model,
        use the techniques we learned in Chapter 2 of *Active Calculus*
        to calculate both the first and second derivatives of each of
        the three models. Do all your work by hand (but also on your
        own, make sure to check it using technology) and show all your
        work.

    4.  Look through the four models you created and find the one that
        has the highest $R^2$ value. This number $R^2$ (it might be
        lower case, $r^2$) is a statistic that measure how well the
        model fits the data. The closer to $1$ this number is, the
        better the fit. Once you identify the model that has the best
        fit, choose a data point in your data set and give the values of
        the first and second derivatives at that point. In 1--3
        well-constructed sentences, explain exactly what these two
        numbers tell you about how your data set is changing
        instantaneously right at that point.

        You are to assume that the person to whom you are writing the
        explanation is smart but does not know a single thing about
        calculus. Therefore you are forbidden to use jargon such as the
        terms *function*, *derivative*, *tangent line*, and so on. I
        (Prof. Talbert) will act as your secretary and return your memo
        to you for editing if it gets too jargony. (Read: Your work will
        get an "R".) The words *data* and *graph* are fairly common and
        therefore OK. As a starting point for your explanations you
        might consider the concepts of a function "increasing at an
        increasing rate", "increasing at a decreasing rate", and so on
        -- but don't rely too much on these stock phrases but rather
        make sure to give the memo recipient usable, actionable
        information that he/she can understand.

3.  To complete this Miniproject, fill out the Miniproject Learning
    Survey:

    <http://bit.ly/mth201miniprojectsurvey>

Evaluation criteria {#evaluation-criteria .unnumbered .unnumbered}
-------------------

All Miniprojects are grading using the **EMRN rubric** given in the
course syllabus. A description of what constitutes E, M, R, and N-level
work for Miniprojects is given in the *Specifications for Student Work*
document; please review this document before submitting your work.

Specifically in this Miniproject, a passing mark (E or M) requires (in
addition to the general requirements given in the *Specifications*
document):

-   All links work.

-   All the graphical information that is supposed to be on Desmos, is
    there.

-   All mathematical work is shown and is correct.

-   Explanatory writing is well written, substantive, and explains
    phenomena in clear terms.

-   The Learning Survey is completed.

Submissions that do all of the above and do an exceptionally good job of
explaining work, carrying out their processes, and presenting work in a
clear, attractive, and professional way are eligible for a grade of "E".

Submitting your work {#submitting-your-work .unnumbered .unnumbered}
--------------------

All Miniproject work must be typewritten and saved as either a PDF or MS
Word file and then uploaded to Blackboard at the **Miniproject 5** area.
Handwritten work will be marked "N" and returned without comment. Work
that is received through means other than Blackboard (for example email
attachments) will be returned without comment and then deleted. You do
not need to give your writeup any particular file name.

For more information on standards for Miniproject writeups, please
review the *Specifications for Student Work* document.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTc2MTkwMzA0OV19
-->