---
tags: mth201, dailyprep
---

# Daily Prep 12A -- MTH 201-04

## Overview 

We've made it to the final module of the course! In Module 12, we'll continue to build on the concept of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Module 12A is mainly a review and extension of the ideas from Module 11B --- the Fundamental Theorem itself, and how to compute definite integrals with it (and apply the concepts to real problems). 

## Learning objectives 

**Basic Learning Objectives:** *Before* our class meeting, use the Resources listed below to learn all of the following. You should be reasonably fluent with all of these tasks prior to our meeting; we will field questions on these, but they will not be retaught. 


+ (*Review*) State the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.
+ (*Review*) Find the most general antiderivative of a function.


**Advanced Learning Objectives:** *During and after* our class meeting, we will work on learning the following. Fluency with these is not required prior to class. 

+ (*Review*) Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to find the exact value of a definite integral using an antiderivative.

## Resources for learning

**Video:** No video to watch this time. Re-watch any ones from Module 11B where you feel you might need extra review. 

**Text:** Re-read [Section 4.4 in the Active Calculus text](https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-4-4-FTC.html). 


## Exercises 

The exercises for this Daily Prep are found on student.desmos.com ("MTH 201 Daily Prep 12A").


## Submission and grading 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjAxMjM0Nzk0OF19
-->