
# MTH 201: Calculus

## Daily Preparation, Module 7A: Finding maximum and minimum values of a function 

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Sunday, October 18

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. 

## Overview 

In Module 7, we start a deep dive into *applications of the derivative*. The first application is one that we've seen before --- finding peaks and troughs on the graph of a function. We can estimate these visually if we can see them; but since estimation is error-prone, we'd like a way to pinpoint the exact location of places where a function reaches a peak or a trough, and find *all* such locations, not just the ones that we see. We'll introduce the concept of the **critical number** of a function to help us, and then the **First** and **Second Derivative Tests** as tools for finding them. Also: If you're reading this overview, [click here for an Easter egg](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSci5k_ZQzsQnTW_knz18WhXtoyNCpbD5EpvjYzzJwUjQ4m__w/viewform). 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **DA.1**  **(CORE)**: I can find the critical values of a function, determine where the function is increasing and decreasing, and apply the First and Second Derivative Tests to classify the critical points as local extrema.
-   **DA.2**: I can determine the intervals of concavity of a function and find all of its points of inflection.


**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

+ Identify the global and local minimum and maximum values of a function, given the function's graph.
+ State the definition of _critical number_ and identify all the critical numbers of a function given the function's graph.
+ State the First Derivative Test and the Second Derivative Test.  

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

+ Find all the critical numbers of a function algebraically using derivatives.
+ Use the First Derivative Test to determine whether a critical number of a function is a relative minimum, relative maximum, or neither.
+ Use the Second Derivative Test to determine whether a critical number of a function is a relative minimum or relative maximum.



## Resources for Learning


**Text:** In the _Active Calculus_ text, read in [Section 3.1](https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-3-1-tests.html) only up to, but _not_ including Example 3.1.10. (Module 7B will start with Example 3.1.10.) 


**Video:** Watch the following from the GVSUMath Calculus playlist: 

- Screencast 3.1.1: Quick review -- Extreme values of functions (4:11) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bzj_oXB6yIU&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=55
- Screencast 3.1.2: Finding local and global extrema (5:06) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tvF3Rq0urvI&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=56
- Screencast 3.1.3: Identifying critical values graphically (4:21) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7RcLQZdB0LM&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=57
- Screencast 3.1.4: Finding critical values (3:12) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x-efl3Br11E&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=58&t=24s
- Screencast 3.1.5: 


You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.


## Exercises

The exercises are on Classkick, in "Module 6B Daily Prep". 

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTkyMTY0MDYxLC0yODYxMDUzMDRdfQ==
-->