# Guided Practice 1.7: Limits, continuity, and differentiability

## Overview

This section introduces and in some cases refines some important conceptual notions related to the derivative. We first introduce the concept of a **one-sided limit**, which is just a limit where we only approach the target point from the left or the right (not both). With that concept, we define what it means for a function to be **continuous** -- a property of functions that is essential for calculus. Finally, we return to the idea of what it means for a function to be **differentiable** and connect this to the idea of continuity. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

- Evaluate a *limit from the left* and a *limit from the right* and use one-sided limits to tell if a (two-sided) limit exists. 
- Define what it means for a function to be *continuous* at a point. 
- Define what it means for a function to be *differentiable* at a point. 
- Determine whether a function is continuous at a point by examining the graph of that function. 
- Determine whether a function is differentiable at a point by examining the graph of that function. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

- Explain the relationship between continuity and differentiability. (If a function is continuous at a point, must it also be differentiable there? If a function is differentiable at a point, must it also be continuous there?) 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Active Calculus_, read Section 1.7. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube playlist (http://bit.ly/GVSUCalculus). 

- [Quick Review: Limits, continuity, and differentiability](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7-S0qHpnddk) (4:02) 
- [More limits](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OmgIej6fHrc) (5:58)
- [Determining continuity](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=71PGm02zFjw) (7:22)
- [Determining differentiability graphically](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_vimObBaJxI) (4:41)

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

All the exercises below use the function $f$ whose graph is in Preview Activity 1.7 in your textbook. The exercises loosely follow the exercises in that preview activity. 

1. For which of the values $a = -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3$ does $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to a} f(x)}$ exist? At the submission form there are checkboxes for you to select. 
2. For the values $a = -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3$ such that $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to a} f(x)}$ does exist (i.e. the values you checked in exercise 1), state the value of the limit. Make sure to label which limit goes with which value. 
3. For the values $a = -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3$ such that $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to a} f(x)}$ does exist (i.e. the values you checked in exercise 1), state the value of the _function_ at those points. NOTE WELL: These function values need not be the same as the limit values from exercise 2. 
4. For which of the values $a = -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3$ does $f'(a)$, the derivative at $a$, exist? At the submission form there are checkboxes for you to select. 
5. Any other mathematical questions from this section? 


_Explanation of the graph's behavior near x = 2:_ As you approach x = 2 from the left, the graph is a gentle slope upward. As you approach from the right, the graph begins to oscillate between -1.5 and -3.5 at a higher and higher frequency. 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1bA2uyW](http://bit.ly/1bA2uyW)