# Guided Practice 1.1: How do we measure velocity?

## Overview

Our study of calculus begins with a basic building block for understanding change: the concept of **average velocity**. Two formulas for average velocity are introduced in the section and connected to the concept of the slope of a line. The concept of **instantaneous velocity** -- central to an understanding of calculus -- is introduced at the end. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

* Given a formula for the position of an object as a function of time, find the object's position at a specific time. 
* Calculate the average velocity of an object over a given time interval using the average velocity formula on page 2. 
* Calculate the average velocity of an object over a given time interval using the average velocity formula on page 5.
* Explain the differences between the two average velocity formulas in this section. 
* Explain the difference between average velocity and instantaneous velocity. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

* Explain the meaning of a negative velocity. 
* Interpret the average velocity of an object geometrically through the use of the graph of its position function. 
* Use the second average velocity formula to find the average velocity of an object on an interval starting at time $t = a$ and ending at time $t = a + h$, where $a$ is given but $h$ is a variable. Express the answer in simplest form as a function of $h$. 
* Given the average velocity of an object from time $t = a$ to time $t = a+h$, find its instantaneous velocity at the single moment $t = a$. (See Example 1.1 and Screencast 1.1.3.)

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Active Calculus_, read Section 1.1 pages 1--7. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube playlist (http://bit.ly/GVSUCalculus). 

- [Using the average velocity formula](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6HPe7iwr88k) (7:39)
- [Alternative average velocity formula](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O_Z9osv6VGk) (11:07)
- [Finding instantaneous velocity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j8kJubOTkME) (14:03) 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. Consider the function $f(x) = 64 - 16(x-1)^2$. Calculate the following: $f(1)$, $f(0.5)$, and the slope of the line that connects the points $(1, f(1))$ and $(0.5, f(0.5))$. On your own, double-check your work with a graph of this function. 
2. Suppose that the height $s$ of a ball (in feet) at time $t$ (in seconds) is given by the formula $s(t) = 64-16(t-1)^2$. Calculate $s(1)$ and $s(0.5)$ and state the units of these quantities (feet, meters, etc.). Then compute the average velocity of the ball from $t = 0.5$ to $t = 1$ using one of the two average velocity formulas from the textbook reading. 
3. Explain in one sentence the connection between the slope of the line you computed in exercise 1 and the value of the average velocity that you computed in exercise 2. 
4. Explain in 1--2 sentences why the average velocity you calculated in exercise 2 might be different from the instantaneous velocity of the ball at the instant $t = 1$. 
5. Any other questions about the mathematical content in this section? 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1bPk6Ym](http://bit.ly/1bPk6Ym)