# Guided Practice 1.5: Interpreting, estimating, and using the derivative

## Overview

In this section we use the concepts we've developed about the derivative to expand its use and scope. We'll first learn how to find the **units** of any derivative, which will give insight into how the derivative can be used apart from "velocity" problems. Then we will learn the computational techniques of **forward**, **backward**, and **central differences** that will allow us to estimate derivatives numerically in case the original function is not a formula but just a table of data. Finally, the section delves into what the derivative means in terms of real-world contexts. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 


* Given a function $y = f(x)$ and the units of measure of both x and y, state the units of $f'(x)$. 
* Estimate the derivative of a function at a point using a forward, backward, and central difference approximation. (See Example 1.4.)

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

* Given a function $y = f(x)$ that is given as a table of data, construct a table of approximate values of $f'(x)$ both by hand and using a spreadsheet. 
* Given the values of $f(a)$ and $f'(a)$, estimate the value of $f(b)$ for some point $b$ near $a$.
* Reason mathematically (without computation) about the values and behavior of the derivative, given information about the original function. 
* Interpret the meaning of a derivative value in clear English that makes sense in context.

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Active Calculus_, read Section 1.5. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube playlist (http://bit.ly/GVSUCalculus). 

- [Quick review: Interpreting, estimating, and using the derivative](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XZa0uNu6Uyk) (3:27)
- [Estimating the derivative](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wWdijnTdkTk) (5:15)
- [Estimating derivatives using spreadsheets](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJ_OZ-Uxs3o) (5:25)

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 
 
1. The amount of rainfall accumulated in Allendale on a given day $t$ hours after noon is given by $R$, measured in inches. For example, $R(2) = 0.5$ means that half an inch of rain has fallen since noon at 2:00pm. Suppose we know that $R(1) = 0.2$, $R(3) = 0.7$, and $R(5) = 0.9$. Estimate the value of $R'(3)$ (the derivative of $R$ at 3:00pm) in three ways: with a forward difference, a backward difference, and a central difference. State your answers and label which is which. 
2. In the previous question, state the units of $R'(3)$ and give a one-sentence explanation of what this quantity tells you, without using the terms *function*, *graph*, *slope*, or *derivative*. 
3. What specific mathematical questions do you have from this Guided Practice? 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1bzZ4vY](http://bit.ly/1bzZ4vY)