# Guided Practice 2.1: Elementary Derivative Rules

## Overview

With this section we take a different turn in our study of calculus and focus for quite some time on *rules for efficient computation* of derivatives. Over the next several class meetings, we will be learning and using computational rules, most of them heavy on algebra, that will replace the limit definition of the derivative for functions given as formulas. (Although remember, not all functions are formulas, so these rules are not universally useful.) In this section we encounter the basic building blocks of these rules: a rule for taking the derivative of **power functions** like $y = x^5$ and $y = x^{-1/2}$, rules for computing **constant multiples and sums of functions**, and a rule for taking the derivative of **exponential functions** like $y = 2^x$. We also introduce some alternative notation for derivatives. 


## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

- Explain what the notation $\frac{dy}{dx}$ means as well as the notation $\frac{d}{dx}$. 
- Use the Constant Functions rule (page 81) to differentiate (which means "take the derivative of") a constant function like $f(x) = 17$. 
- Use the Power Functions rule to differentiate a power function. 
- Use the Exponential Functions rule to differentiate an exponential function. 
- Use the Constant Multiple Rule to differentiate a constant multiple of a function (for example, $f(x) = 17x^4$.) 
- Use the Sum Rule to differentiate a sum (or difference) of functions (for example, $f(x) = x^4 + x^2 - 3$). 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

- Given a function f given as a formula, find the equation of the tangent line to the graph of f at a point using the new computational rules introduced in this section. 
- Given a function f given as a formula that represents some real-world quantity, find the instantaneous rate of change in that quantity at a point using the new computational rules introduced in this section. 
- Given a function f given as a formula, calculate both its first and second derivatives and use it to analyze whether f is increasing or decreasing at a point and whether f is concave up or concave down at a point. 
- Use the rules introduced in this section to differentiate functions that are *not* given as a formula. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Active Calculus_, read Section 2.1. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube playlist (http://bit.ly/GVSUCalculus). 

- [Quick Review: Elementary derivative rules](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wFOgWzI0SuQ) (3:33)
- [Derivatives of constant and power functions](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ciBNzth33Fw) (5:19)
- [Derivatives of exponential functions](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcQieXhoAqs) (2:54)
- [Derivatives of constant multiples](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gya8IngB1BI) (4:06)
- [Derivatives of sums](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BaAj1IZvt-w) (7:14) 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. Alice was asked to find the derivative of the function $y = 3^x$ and came up with $y' = x 3^{x-1}$. Is this right? If not, explain the misconception that Alice had, state what the correct derivative should be and the rule or rules from this section used to find it.
2. Bob was asked to find the derivative of the function $g(x) = 3^{1/2}$ and came up with $g'(x) = \frac{1}{2} \cdot 3^{-1/2}$. Is this right? If not, explain the misconception that Alice had, state what the correct derivative should be and the rule or rules from this section used to find it.
3. A short WeBWorK set has been set up called "Guided Practice 2.1" that will provide you with practice on basic computations from this section along with feedback. Please complete that set in WeBWorK. It will not count toward your online homework grade, but __completion of this WeBWorK set with a 5/5 score is required to earn a Pass rating on this Guided Practice__. 
4. Two important pieces of notation are used in this section regarding functions $y = f(x)$: $\frac{dy}{dx}$ and $\frac{d}{dx}$. What do these two notations mean, and what is the difference between the two? 

## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1c0IVQe](http://bit.ly/1c0IVQe)