# Guided Practice 2.7: Derivatives of functions given implicitly

## Overview

In this section we take up two problems: (1) finding tangent lines to curves that are not graphs of functions, for example circles or curves that double back on themselves, and (2) finding derivatives of functions for which complete information (such as a formula) is not given. Both of these problems are connect by the same concept, that of an _implicit function_. The process we develop here, sometimes called *implicit differentiation*, is a powerful application of the Chain Rule that has some similarities to problems you've worked before where the functions involved are given only as data or as graphs. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

- Explain what it means for a curve to be an *implicit function*, as opposed to an explicit function, of x. 
- Identify a function as _implicit_ or _explicit_. 
- Take the derivative of a function that is, or that involves, an implicit function. (This is done in the Preview Activity). 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

- Given an equation in x and y, where y is an implicit function of x, calculate the derivative $\frac{dy}{dx}$.
- Find the slope and equation of a tangent line to a curve that is specified by an equation that is not the graph of a function. 
- Find the points on a curve where the tangent line is horizontal and where the tangent line is vertical. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Active Calculus_, read Section 2.7. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube playlist (http://bit.ly/GVSUCalculus). 

- [Quick Review: Derivatives of functions given implicitly](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YI7uxdvcq4E) (2:23) 
- [Derivatives of implicit functions](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEiiLU2jFng) (5:06) 
- [Finding slope with implicit differentiation](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_2aCDXYMz1U) (8:21)

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

In Preview Activity 2.7 you are asked to differentiate a function that combines an implicitly defined function f (whose formula is not known) with an explicit function (whose formula is known). Here is part (a) of that Preview Activity so you will have a sense of what you are supposed to do: 

$$\frac{d}{dx}[x^2 + f(x)] = \frac{d}{dx}[x^2] + \frac{d}{dx}[f(x)] = 2x + f'(x)$$

Now you do the following. You do not need to show your work on these unless you want to -- just the answer is necessary. 

1. Work Preview Activity 2.7(b).  (Hint: Product Rule.)
2. Work Preview Activity 2.7(c).  (Hint: You'll need the Chain Rule for the third term.)
3. Work Preview Activity 2.7(d). (Hint: Chain Rule again.) 
4. Work Preview Activity 2.5(e). (Hint: You'll need the Product Rule and Chain Rule.)


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1KCt3Cv](http://bit.ly/1KCt3Cv)