# Guided Practice 2.8: Using derivatives to evaluate limits

## Overview

We begin to transition into applications of the derivative in this section, where we learn how derivatives can be used to evaluate seemingly-intractable limit problems such as 

$$\lim_{x \to 0} \frac{\ln(1+x)}{x}$$

The key to this application is a mathematical result called *l'Hopital's Rule*, which allows us to replace the expression whose limit we are taking with a simpler expression involving derivatives. Also in this section, we will take up the concept of the *infinite limit* which examines the behavior of a function as the inputs get very large in both the positive and negative directions. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

- Explain what is meant by a limit that is an “indeterminate form”. 
- State L’Hopital’s Rule. Also be able to pronounce the word “L’Hopital” correctly. 
- Explain how L’Hopital’s rule is used to calculate limits having an indeterminate form. 
- Explain what the expression $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to \infty} f(x) = L}$ means in plain English.  
- State the $\infty$ version of L’Hopital’s Rule. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

- Use L’Hopital’s Rule to calculate limits that have an indeterminate form 0/0.
- Use L’Hopital’s Rule to calculate limits that have an indeterminate form $\infty/\infty$. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Active Calculus_, read Section 2.8. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube playlist (http://bit.ly/GVSUCalculus). 

- [Quick Review: L'Hopital's Rule](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KXGhzie3b8s) (3:28)
- [Using L'Hopital's Rule with zero](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=flM7qVLdezY) (7:27)
- [Using L'Hopital's Rule with infinity](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wXXej6AmEKQ) (8:46) 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

For the following exercises, consider the function 

$$f(x) = \frac{x^5 + x - 2}{x^2 - 1}$$

1. In Geogebra or a graphing calculator, plot the graph of $f(x)$ near x = 1. Do not submit your graph. But based on the graph, does $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to 1}  \frac{x^5 + x - 2}{x^2 - 1}}$ exist? If so, what does this limit appear to equal, and how do you know? If not, why not? 
2. In the language of the section, explain why the limit $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to 1}  \frac{x^5 + x - 2}{x^2 - 1}}$ is an *indeterminate form*. (Hint: Try to evaluate the limit by directly substituting x = 1, and see what you get.)
3. Decide whether the following statement is true or whether it's false: *"If a limit comes out to 0/0 through direct substitution, then the limit fails to exist."* Explain your reasoning. 
4. Now use L'Hopital's Rule to evaluate the limit above. Do your work on a separate page, and on the webform, explain the steps you took and then state the answer you get. (Hint: The limit should equal the number you guessed in exercise 1.) 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1KCteOq](http://bit.ly/1KCteOq)