<script type="text/javascript" src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=default"></script>

# Guided Practice for 1.2: The notion of limit

## Overview 
In this section we introduce the all-important concept of the **limit**. A limit is a process that we apply to an existing function where we let the input to the function get closer and closer to -- but not become exactly equal to -- a certain input and observe what the outputs do. This process is central for computing instantaneous velocities, and it will lead us to the main concepts of calculus. For now, we will define the concept of the limit and calculate limits using graphical and numerical methods. 

## Learning objectives 

### BASIC learning objectives
Each student will be responsible for learning and demonstrating proficiency in the following objectives PRIOR to the class meeting. The entrance quiz for the class meeting will cover these objectives. 

* State the definition of what it means for a function f to have a limit L as x approaches a number a, and explain what the definition means in nontechnical terms. 
* Calculate limits of functions (or determine if a function fails to have a limit) by examining a graph of the function (see Example 1.1). 
* Calculate limits of functions (or determine if a function fails to have a limit) by constructing a table of values for the function (see Example 1.2).
 
### ADVANCED learning objectives 
The following objectives should be mastered by each student DURING and FOLLOWING the class session through active work and practice: 

* Find the instantaneous velocity of a moving object at a particular point by using limits and the average velocity formulas. 

## Resources
*Reading*: **Read Section 1.2, pages 10--17 in Active Calculus**. We will work the Activities in class, but you may also work on them outside of class for further understanding. 

*Viewing*: Watch the following videos at the MTH 201 YouTube Playlist. These have a total running time of 12 minutes, 49 seconds (i.e. roughly the same time as an in-class lecture on the material): 

- [Limits](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GZzJOAUOqLI&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=4) (6:02)
- [Limits of functions using graphing tools](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TFu_sh_orM&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=5) (6:27)
- [Limits of functions using tables](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GdBIiRzaTAQ&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=6) (5:58) 
- [Limits of functions using spreadsheets](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAepmkpG34A&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=7) (5:38)

## Exercises 
These exercises can be done during or after your reading and video watching. They are intended to help you make examples of the concepts you are reading and viewing. Work these out on scratch paper, and then you will be asked to submit the results on a web form at the end. 

**Guided Practice exercises are graded on the basis of completeness and effort only.** So you should give a good-faith effort to answer each exercise and be right in your answer, but if you make a mathematical or conceptual mistake it will not count against you. However, if you leave an item blank, put "I don't know", or similarly do not put forth an effort to answer each question, you will lose credit. 

1. Work through Preview Activity 1.2 in the section. You'll enter your responses on a web form given below. 
2. Consider the function $$f(x) = \frac{x^2 - 4}{x+2}$$. Calculate the following: f(-1.5), f(-1.9), f(-1.99), f(-1.999). Then calculate f(-2.5), f(-2.1), f(-2.01), f(-2.001). Do your work on a calculator or spreadsheet and enter just the results into the webform below. Then, state what you believe is the value of \lim_{x \to -2} f(x) and give a one-sentence explanation of how you got your answer. 
3. Explain what's wrong with each of the following attempts to calculate the limit in Exercise 2: 

	a) Just calculate f(-1.9) and f(-2.1) only, and then guess the value of the limit. 
	b) Just calculate f(-1.5), f(-1.9), f(-1.99), f(-1.999) and then guess the value of the limit. 
	
4. What specific mathematical questions remain after doing this assignment? Also, do you have any questions about the course so far? 
 
## Turn-in instructions

Go to the web form located at the following link and type in your answers: [http://bit.ly/1dmt3Hc](http://bit.ly/1dmt3Hc)

Responses are due **one hour before your section's class time**. If you do not have access to the internet where you live, please let me know in advance and we will make alternative arrangements.  