# MTH 201: Calculus

## Daily Preparation, Module 6A: The Chain Rule

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Tuesday, October 6

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. 

## Overview 

This module introduces the final and perhaps most important derivative rule we will learn in the course: **The Chain Rule**. The Chain Rule is used when taking derivatives of *composite* functions, which you'll recall are functions that are made up of two or more functions "chained" together by plugging one into the other, like $\sqrt{x^2 + 1}$ or $\cos(e^x)$. The commonality of composites in real applications makes the Chain Rule of primary importance as we move ahead. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **DC.2**  **(CORE)**: I can compute derivatives correctly for products, quotients, and composites of functions.
-   **DC.3**: I can compute derivatives correctly using multiple rules in combination.
-   **DC.4**: I can compute the derivatives correctly for logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse trigonometric functions.



**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

+ (Review) Determine the fundamental algebraic structure of a function. 
+ (Review) If the fundamental algebraic structure of a function is a *composite*, determine the inner and outer functions in the composite. 
+ State the Chain Rule and apply it to a simple composite function. 

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

+ Use the Chain Rule to differentiate a composite of two basic functions.
+ Differentiate a function whose derivative involves a mixture of rules (Product, Quotient, Chain, etc.)




## Resources for Learning

**Text:** Read through [Section 2.5](https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-2-5-chain.html) of the *Active Calculus* textbook.  Work through the examples and all interactive exercises found at the end of the section. 

**Video:** First, review the videos on composite functions and fundamental algebraic structure that were created and posted for the Functions Bootcamp assignment. You can find those on Blackboard > *Checkpoints* > *Functions Bootcamp* and then these are videos 7 and 8. Or click the links: 

- (Video 7) Composites: https://gvsu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=8742a5e1-3206-4e92-b3ac-ac240134cd86
- (Video 8) Fundamental structure: https://gvsu.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=672d8d71-903a-4965-8109-ac240134e943 

Then, watch the following from the GVSUMath Calculus playlist: 

- Screencast 2.5.1: Quick review - The Chain Rule (2:21)
- Screencast 2.5.2: Example of the Chain Rule - Polynomials (4:33)
- Screencast 2.5.3: Example of the Chain Rule - Radicals (7:20) 
- Screencast 2.5.4: Chain Rule examples - Trigonometric functions (5:15) 
- Screencast 2.5.5: Chain Rule examples - Exponential functions (6:01) 
- Screencast 2.5.6: Chain Rule examples - Mixing rules (10:30) 
- 
You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.


## Exercises

The exercises are on Classkick, in "Module 5B Daily Prep". 

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTg2OTUzNTk5MF19
-->