# MTH 201: Calculus

## Daily Preparation, Module 6B: Derivatives of inverse functions

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Tuesday, October 13

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. 

## Overview 

Module 6B introduces the last of our rules for differentiation. We'll apply the Chain Rule to find derivative formulas for **inverse functions** that are the "opposites" of other functions. Especially we will focus on the derivative of $y = \ln(x)$ and *inverse trigonometric functions* like $\arctan(x)$ and $\arcsin(x)$. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **DC.2**  **(CORE)**: I can compute derivatives correctly for products, quotients, and composites of functions.
-   **DC.3**: I can compute derivatives correctly using multiple rules in combination.
-   **DC.4**: I can compute the derivatives correctly for logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse trigonometric functions.



**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

+ *(Review)* Explain what is meant by an "inverse function" and the notation $f^{-1}$. 
+ *(Review)* State the definitions of the functions $y = \log_b (x)$, $y = \ln(x)$, $y = \arctan(x)$, and $y = \arcsin(x)$ and important properties of these functions. 
+ State the derivative of the function $y = \ln(x)$.
+ State the derivatives of the arcsine and arctangent functions.  

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

+ Find derivatives of inverse functions including logarithmic and inverse trig functions, in combination with other rules. 




## Resources for Learning

**Module 6B involves a significant amount of review of precalculus concepts, about logarithms and trigonometric functions.** If you don't have a strong background with this material, you may need to budget more time for review. 


**Text:** For this module you'll do a little reading from the prequel to MTH 201, a course we call MTH 124, *Functions and Models*, in addition to reading from our text. 

- First, read sections 1.7.1 and 1.7.3 from *Active Prelude to Calculus* and try the interactive exercise at the end: https://activecalculus.org/prelude/sec-changing-inverse.html 
- After doing this, read sections 2.6.2 and 2.6.3 of *Active Calculus* and try the interactive exercises at the end: https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-2-6-inverse.html 


**Video:** Watch the following 

You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.


## Exercises

The exercises are on Classkick, in "Module 6A Daily Prep". 

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTQ3NTc1NjUzMV19
-->