
# MTH 201: Calculus

## Daily Preparation, Module 8A: The Extreme Value Theorem and global extreme values 

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **TUESDAY**, October 27 (Note the different date!) 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. 

## Overview 

Module 8 is a continuation of the concepts of Module 7 where we analyzed the behavior of a function by finding and classifying its critical values and examining its concavity; it's also an important setup for Module 9, where we look at applied problems involving finding the "best" values of a function. In Module 8A we introduce the **Extreme Value Theorem**, which states that every continuous function has an absolute/global maximum and minimum function if it's constrained to a closed interval. This mathematical result gives us a simplified process for finding global max and min values of functions. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-  **DA.3**: I can use the Extreme Value Theorem to find the absolute maximum and minimum values of a continuous function on a closed interval.


**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

+ (*Review*) Find the critical values of a function using its first derivative, and classify them using the First or Second Derivative Tests. 
+ (*Review*) State the definition of a **closed interval**. 
+ (*Review*) State informally what it means for a function to be **continuous on a closed interval**.
+ State the **Extreme Value Theorem** and explain the three-step process it provides for finding the absolute extreme values of a continuous function on a closed interval. 

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

+ Apply the Extreme Value Theorem to find the absolute maximum and minimum values of a continuous function on a closed interval. 
+ Given an applied setting, build a function that models the situation; identify a closed interval for its domain; then identify its absolute maximum and minimum values on the interval. 




## Resources for Learning


**Text:** In the _Active Calculus_ text, read [Section 3.3](https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-3-3-optimization.html). 


**Video:** Watch the following from the GVSUMath Calculus playlist. 

- Screencast 3.3.1: Quick review -- Global optimization (2:31) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldJfxeGHv3Y&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=66
- Screencast 3.3.2: Finding absolute extreme values (8:08) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YE57SJzL8r8&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=67 
- Screencast 3.3.3: Optimizing population (7:09) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kz9JFNlQVVI&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=68


You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.


## Exercises

The exercises are on Classkick. If you need codes, they are: 

- Section 02: `NDC NP7`
- Section 04: `Z5O NRE`

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE4ODYwOTY2NzcsLTEwMjYyNDE4ODVdfQ
==
-->