# MTH 201: Calculus

## Daily Preparation, Module 10A: Determining distance traveled from velocity

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **TUESDAY**, November 10 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. 

## Overview 

With Module 10 we change gears to study the last big concept of this course. We're going to study the question of, **If we know how fast an object is moving, how far does it travel on a given time interval?** This is sort of the opposite of the question we started the course with in August --- *Given the position of a moving object, how fast is it moving?* --- and we'll answer it by building a new tool that is related to, but quite different from the derivative. We start that process here by going back to basic geometry. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **INT.1:** I can calculate the area between curves, net change, and displacement using geometric formulas and Riemann sums.


**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- Given the graph of a moving object's velocity, estimate the distance it traveled over a time interval using a rectangle sum. 
- Define the term *antiderivative* and identify an antiderivative of a given function. 

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Given the graph of a moving object's velocity (which varies over time), estimate the distance it traveled over a time interval using a rectangle sum. 
- Use an antiderivative to compute the distance traveled by an object, given a formula for its velocity.




## Resources for Learning


**Text:** In the _Active Calculus_ text, [read Section 4.1](https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-4-1-velocity-distance.html). 


**Video:** In addition to these from the GVSUMath playlist, there is an insane number of videos on YouTube from other sources that give examples of applied optimization problems. 

- Screencast 3.4.1: Quick review -- Applied optimization (2:51) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ilu2SZa3SYA&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=69
- Screencast 3.4.2: Fencing optimization (7:09) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jH6J-n6zt4c&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=70&t=7s
- Screencast 3.4.3: Optimization with trigonometry (13:25) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uJFxdxSBjok&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=71



You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.


## Exercises

The exercises are on Classkick. If you need codes, they are: 

- Section 02: `5OG 4GG`
- Section 04: `IHX CMO`

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTgwMTQ2OTQ3MV19
-->