# MTH 201: Calculus

## Daily Preparation, Module 12B: The Total Change Theorem

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Tuesday, December 1** (Back to the original schedule) 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. 

## Overview 

Our last Daily Prep of the semester! And in this lesson, we'll work with one last important result that connects definite integrals and the FTC to everyday life -- the **Total Change Theorem**, which tells us that the integral of a rate of change gives a total change. 


## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **INT.4**  **(CORE)**: I can evaluate a definite integral using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.
-   **INT.5:** I can correctly antidifferentiate basic functions and identify antiderivatives.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

+ State the Total Change Theorem. 
+ Explain how a definite integral can be used to solve a problem about total change.

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

+ Find the total amount of change in a function on an interval, using a definite integral. 


## Resources for Learning

**Video:** Just one video this time: 

- Screencast 4.4.4 -- Application of the Total Change Theorem (6:41) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q8ZKTA4w9q0&list=PL9bIjQJDwfGuXQHuS5Jkmum_CFILoCZX-&index=91

**Text:** Re-read [the section on the Total Change Theorem in Section 4.4 in the Active Calculus text](https://activecalculus.org/single/sec-4-4-FTC.html). 

You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.


## Exercises

These are on Classkick. Go to app.classkick.com and log in, and it should be in your list. If you need a code: 

- Section 02: `GA8 DTM`
- Section 04: `2K2 2QM`

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Just work through the activities; your work is saved as you go. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1OTM1ODQyNl19
-->